5
What is data science?
1.1What is data science?
Data science is the practice of using data to try to understand and solve real-world prob-
lems.  This  concept  isnt  exactly  new;  people  have  been analyzing  sales  figures  and
trends since  the  invention  of  the  zero. In the  past  decade,  however,  we  have  gained
access to exponentially more data than existed before. The advent of computers has
assisted in the generation of all that data, but computing is also our only way to pro-
cess the mounds of information. With computer code, a data scientist can transform
or aggregate data, run statistical analyses, or train machine learning models. The out-
put of this code may be a report or dashboard for human consumption, or it could be
a machine learning model that will be deployed to run continuously.
 If a retail company is having trouble deciding where to put a new store, for exam-
ple, it may call in a data scientist to do an analysis. The data scientist could look at the
historical data of locations where online orders are shipped to understand where cus-
tomer  demand  is.  They  may  also  combine  that  customer  location  data  with  demo-
graphic and income information for those localities from census records. With these
datasets,  they  could  find  the  optimal  place  for  the  new  store  and  create  a  Microsoft
PowerPoint  presentation  to present their recommendation to the companys vice
president of retail operations.
 In another situation, that same retail company may want to increase online order
sizes by recommending items to customers while they shop. A data scientist could load
the historical web order data and create a machine learning model that, given a set of
items currently in the cart, predicts the best item to recommend to the shopper. After
creating  that  model,  the  data  scientist would  work  with  the companys  engineering
team  so  that  every  time  a  customer  is shopping,  the  new  machine  learning  model
serves up the recommended items.
  When  many  people  start  looking  into  data  science,  one  challenge  they  face  is
being overwhelmed by the amount of things they need to learn, such as coding (but
which language?), statistics (but which methods are most important in practice, and
which are largely academic?), machine learning (but how is machine learning differ-
ent from statistics or AI?), and the domain knowledge of whatever industry they want
to  work  in  (but  what  if  you  don't  know  where  you  want  to  work?).  In  addition,  they
need  to  learn  business  skills such as effectively communicating  results  to  audiences
ranging from other data scientists to the CEO. This anxiety can be exacerbated by job
postings that ask for a PhD, multiple years of data science experience, and expertise in
a laundry list of statistical and programming methods. How can you possibly learn all
these skills? Which ones should you start with? What are the basics?
 If youve looked into the different areas of data science, you may be familiar with
Drew Conways popular data science Venn diagram. In Conways opinion (at the time of
the  diagrams  creation),  data  science  fell  into the intersection of math and statistical
Licensed to Adriana Picoral <adrianaps@email.arizona.edu>
E
xcerpt from "Build a Career in Data Science" by Emily Robinson and Jacqueline Nolis (2020) ISBN: 9781617296246